[Entry] Adding new concept entry data-types.md #4246 (#4267)
Codecademy/docs: content/dart/concepts/data-types/data-types.md

---
Title: 'Data Types'
Description: 'Data types categorize the various types of values that a program can store and manipulate.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Code Foundations'
Tags:
  - 'Dart'
  - 'Arithmetic'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-dart'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

In Dart, **data types** are stored in variables, just like in other languages like [`C`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/c/variables), [`Python`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/variables) or [`Java`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/variables), and since [`Dart`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/dart) is a type-safe language, to guarantee that a variable's value always matches the variable's static type, it combines runtime and static type checking. Meaning that trying to store a string in an integer variable would not work.

## What is Static Typing?

> Static typing refers to the property of the programming language where variables are bound to their types at compile-time. What does this mean? It means that the type of a variable is known and checked by the compiler before the code is executed, allowing for early detection of type-related errors. In the example below all variables (myInteger, myDouble, myBoolean, and myString) are declared with an explicit data type (int, double, bool, and String, respectively):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static typing refers to the property of the programming language where variables are bound to their types at compile-time. It means that the type of a variable is known and checked by the compiler before the code is executed, allowing for early detection of type-related errors. In the example below all variables (myInteger, myDouble, myBoolean, and myString) are declared with an explicit data type (int, double, bool, and String, respectively):
```
Let's keep it as short as possible.

```dart
int myInteger = 42;
double myDouble = 3.14;
bool myBoolean = true;
String myString = "Hello, Codecademy!";
```

Below are a couple of examples of incorrect declarations of values to variables:

```dart
// Non-integer value to an int variable
int myInteger = "42";

// Omitted the explicit data type for a variable
var missingType = 3.14;

// Declared a boolean variable but provided a string value
bool myBoolean = "false";

// Mismatch between declared type and assigned value
String myString = 123;
```

## Numbers

Numbers are used to hold numeric values. They can be classified as `int`, `num`, and `double`:

```dart
int wholeNumber = 42;
double floatingPointNumber = 3.14;
num inheritedNumber = 7; // num can hold both int and double values

print(wholeNumber);          // Output: 42
print(floatingPointNumber);  // Output: 3.14
print(inheritedNumber);      // Output: 7
```

## Strings

> Strings `string` are used to represent a sequence of characters, and they are embedded in either single "..." or double-quotes "...":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strings `string` are used to represent a sequence of characters, and they are embedded in either single ('...') or double-quotes ("..."):
```

```dart
String greeting = "Double quotes work!";
String anotherString = 'Single quotes work too!';

print(greeting);  // Output: Double quotes work!
print(anotherString);  // Output: Single quotes work too!
```

## Booleans

Booleans `bool` represents values true or false:

```dart
bool isDartFun = true;
bool isPythonFun = false;

print(isDartFun); // Output: true
print(isPythonFun); // Output: false
```

## Symbols

Symbol `Symbol` object represents an operator or identifier. Objects are particularly valuable for APIs that identify elements by name. This is crucial for APIs because while minification can alter identifier names, it does not impact the underlying identifier symbols:

```dart
Symbol goodSymbol = Symbol('myIdentifier');

print(goodSymbol);  // Output: Symbol("myIdentifier")
```

## Lists

List `List` represents a collection of an ordered group of objects, working similar to `arrays` in other programming languages:

```dart
List<int> numbersList = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

print(numbersList);  // Output: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

## Maps

> Map `Map` object consists of a key and value pair and they can be any data type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Map `Map` object consists of a key-value pair and it can be any data type:
```

---
Title: 'Data Types'

> Description: 'In Dart, data types are stored in variables, just like in other languages like C, Python or Java.'

Reviewer 2: just make short desc explaining what data types are

Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Web Development'
Tags:
  - 'Dart'
  - 'Arithmetic'
CatalogContent:

>   - 'learn-c'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - 'learn-dart'
```

## What is Static Typing?

Static typing refers to the property of the programming language where variables are bound to their types at compile-time. What does this mean? It means that the type of a variable is known and checked by the compiler before the code is executed, allowing for early detection of type-related errors.

On the example below all variables (myInteger, myDouble, myBoolean, and myString) are declared with an explicit data type (int, double, bool, and String, respectively).

```
int myInteger = 42;
double myDouble = 3.14;
bool myBoolean = true;
String myString = "Hello, Codecademy!";
```
Below are a couple of examples with incorrect declarations of values to variables.

```
// Non-integer value to an int variable
int myInteger = "42";

// Omitted the explicit data type for a variable
var missingType = 3.14;

// Declared a boolean variable but provided a string value
bool myBoolean = "false";

// Mismatch between declared type and assigned value
String myString = 123;

```

## Numbers

> Numbers are used to hold numeric values. They can be classified as `int`,`num` and `double`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Numbers are used to hold numeric values. They can be classified as `int`, `num`, and `double`:
```

```
int wholeNumber = 42;
double floatingPointNumber = 3.14;
num inheritedNumber = 7; // num can hold both int and double values

print(wholeNumber);          // Output: 42
print(floatingPointNumber);  // Output: 3.14
print(inheritedNumber);      // Output: 7

```

> Below is an example with incorrect declarations of values to ``int``, ``num``, and ``double`` data type variables.
> 
> ```
> int invalidInt = "42"; // Assigning a string to an int
> double missingType = 3; // Assigning an int to a double
> bool booleanNumber = 3.14; // Assigning a double to a bool
> String stringNumber = 123; // Assigning an int to a string
> 
> print(invalidInt);       // Incompatible types
> print(missingType);      // Missing type annotation
> print(booleanNumber);    // Incompatible types
> print(stringNumber);     // Incompatible types
> 
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
No need for this block

## Strings

> Strings``string`` are used to represent a sequence of characters, and they are embedded in either single'...' or double-quotes "...". 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Strings `string ` are used to represent a sequence of characters, and they are embedded in either single "..." or double-quotes "...":
```

```
String greeting = "Double quotes work!";
String anotherString = 'Single quotes work too!';

print(greeting);  // Output: Double quotes work!
print(anotherString);  // Output: Single quotes work too!

```

> Below is an example with incorrect declarations of values to ``string`` data type variables.
> 
> ```
> String missingQuotes = Hello, Dart!; // Missing quotes around the string
> 
> print(missingQuotes); // Outcome: Error, missing quotes
> 
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Again there's no need for this block to be here.

## Booleans

> Booleans ``bool`` represents values true and false. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Booleans `bool` represents values true or false:
```

```
bool isDartFun = true;
bool isPythonFun = false;

print(isDartFun); // Output: true
print(isPythonFun); // Output: false

```

## Symbols

> Symbol ``Symbol`` object represents an operator or identifier. Objects are particularly valuable for APIs that identify elements by name. This is crucial for APIs because while minification can alter identifier names, it does not impact the underlying identifier symbols.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Symbol `Symbol` object represents an operator or identifier. Objects are particularly valuable for APIs that identify elements by name. This is crucial for APIs because while minification can alter identifier names, it does not impact the underlying identifier symbols:
```

```
Symbol goodSymbol = Symbol('myIdentifier');

print(goodSymbol);  // Output: Symbol("myIdentifier")

```

> Below is an example of incorrect declarations of values to ``Symbol`` data type variables.
> 
> ```
> 
> String identifierName = 'myIdentifier';
> Symbol badSymbol = Symbol(identifierName);
> 
> print(badSymbol);  // Outcome: Error, minification can impact identifier symbols
> 
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Lists

> List ``List`` is used to represent a collection of ordered group of objects, working simillar to `arrays` in other programming languages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List `List` represents a collection of an ordered group of objects, working similar to `arrays` in other programming languages:
```

```

List<int> numbersList = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

print(numbersList);  // Output: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

```

> Below is an example of incorrect declarations of values to ``List`` data type variables.
> 
> ```
> 
> List<String> invalidList = [1, 2, 3];  // Incorrect: Mismatched types in the list
> 
> print(invalidList);  // Outcome: Error, incompatible types in the list
> 
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Maps

> Map ``Map`` object consists in a key and value pair and they can be any data type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Map `Map` object consists of a key and value pair and they can be any data type:
```

```

Map<String, int> studentScores = {
  'Alice': 95,
  'Bob': 87,
  'Charlie': 92,
};

print(studentScores['Alice']);  // Output: 95
print(studentScores['Bob']);    // Output: 87

```

> Below is of example with incorrect or not so recommended declarations of values to `Map` data type variable.
> 
> ```
> Map<int, String> invalidMap = {
>     'John': 'Doe'};  // Mismatched key-value types
> 
> Map<dynamic, dynamic> dynamicMap = {
>     'name': 'Alice', 42: 'age'};  // Works, but not recommended for type safety 
> 
> print(invalidMap['John']);  // Outcome: Error, incompatible key type
> print(dynamicMap[42]);  // Output: age (not recommended)
> 
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Nulls

> Nulls `Null`is a type that represents the absence of a value in a variable. This type can only have one possible value, which is null. Dart uses a sound null safety system, meaning that variables are non-nullable by default, and they have to be explicitly declared as nullable if they need to be able to hold a null value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nulls `Null` is a type that represents the absence of a value in a variable. This type can only have one possible value, which is null. Dart uses a sound null safety system, meaning that variables are non-nullable by default, and they have to be explicitly declared as nullable if they need to be able to hold a null value:
```

```

int? nullableInt;  // Nullable integer
String? nullableString;  // Nullable string

print(nullableInt);  // Output: null
print(nullableString);  // Output: null

```

## Runes

> Runes ``Runes`` expose the Unicode code points of a string. Unicode is a character encoding standard that aims to encompass all characters used by humans for writing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Runes `Runes` exposes the Unicode code points of a string. Unicode is a character encoding standard that aims to encompass all characters used by humans for writing:
```

```

String greeting = 'Hello 👋'; // String with emoji

// Using Runes to iterate over the Unicode code points
for (var codePoint in greeting.runes) {
  print('Code Point: $codePoint, Character: ${String.fromCharCode(codePoint)}');
}

```

> Below is an example of incorrect declarations of values to `Runes` data type variable.
> 
> ```
> 
> String invalidString = 'Invalid 😞'; // String with emoji
> 
> // Attempting to iterate over Unicode code points without using Runes
> for (var character in invalidString.runes) {
>   print('Character: $character');
> }
> 
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## What is Dynamic?

> Dynamic typing is checked dynamically at runtime rather than statically at compile-time. It introduces flexibility but at the same time sacrifices some of the benefits of static typing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dynamic typing is checked dynamically at runtime rather than statically at compile-time. It introduces flexibility but at the same time sacrifices some of the benefits of static typing:
```

```

dynamic flexibleVariable = 42;

print(flexibleVariable);  // Output: 42

```

> Below are some more examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below are some more examples:
```
